[docs] Add SSR section (#880)
lit/lit.dev: packages/lit-dev-content/site/docs/ssr/client-api.md

---
title: Lit SSR client API
eleventyNavigation:

>   key: Client API

Reviewer: Let's change this to "Client Usage" (and move declarative shadow DOM details here)

  parent: Server rendering
  order: 3
---

{% labs-disclaimer %}

Lit SSR generates static HTML for the browser to parse and paint without any JavaScript. (Browsers that do not have support for Declarative Shadow DOM will require some JavaScript polyfill for Lit components authored to utilize the Shadow DOM.) For pages with static content, this is all that's needed. However, if the page content needs to be dynamic and respond to user interactions, it will need JavaScript to re-apply that reactivity.

How to re-apply that reactivity client-side depends on whether you are rendering standalone Lit templates or utilizing Lit components.

## Standalone Lit Templates

> "Hydration" for Lit templates is the process of having Lit re-associate the expressions of a Lit templates with the nodes they should update in the DOM as well as adding event listeners. In order to hydrate Lit templates, the `hydrate()` method from the `experimental-hydrate` module is provided in the `lit` package. Before you update a server-rendered container using `render()`, you must first call `hydrate()` on that container using the same template and data that was used to render on the server:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
"Hydration" for Lit templates is the process of having Lit re-associate the expressions of Lit templates with the nodes they should update in the DOM as well as adding event listeners. In order to hydrate Lit templates, the `hydrate()` method from the `experimental-hydrate` module is provided in the `lit` package. Before you update a server-rendered container using `render()`, you must first call `hydrate()` on that container using the same template and data that was used to render on the server:
```

```js
import {render} from 'lit';
import {hydrate} from 'lit/experimental-hydrate.js';
import {myTemplate} from './my-template.js';
// Initial hydration required before render:
// (must be same data used to render on the server)
const initialData = getInitialAppData();
hydrate(myTemplate(initialData), document.body);

// After hydration, render will efficiently update the server-rendered DOM:
const update = (data) => render(myTemplate(data), document.body);
```

## Lit components

> To re-apply reactivity to Lit components, the custom element definition needs to be loaded for them to be upgraded, enabling their lifecycle callbacks, and the templates in the components' shadow roots needs to be hydrated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To re-apply reactivity to Lit components, custom element definitions need to be loaded for them to be upgraded, enabling their lifecycle callbacks, and the templates in the components' shadow roots needs to be hydrated.
```

> Upgrading can be achieved simply by loading the component module that registers the custom element. This can be done by loading a bundle of all the component definitions for a page, or may be done based on more sophisticated heuristics where only a subset of definitions are loaded as needed. To ensure templates in `LitElement` shadow roots are hydrated, load the `lit/experimental-hydrate-support.js` module which installs support for `LitElement` to automatically hydrate itself when it detects it was server-rendered with declarative shadow DOM. This module must be loaded before the `lit` module, and therefore any component modules that import `lit`, is loaded to ensure hydration support is properly installed.

Reviewer 2: Found this sentence a little hard to parse, might help:
```suggestion
Upgrading can be achieved simply by loading the component module that registers the custom element. This can be done by loading a bundle of all the component definitions for a page, or may be done based on more sophisticated heuristics where only a subset of definitions are loaded as needed. To ensure templates in `LitElement` shadow roots are hydrated, load the `lit/experimental-hydrate-support.js` module which installs support for `LitElement` to automatically hydrate itself when it detects it was server-rendered with declarative shadow DOM. This module must be loaded before the `lit` module is loaded (including any component modules that import `lit`) to ensure hydration support is properly installed.
```

When Lit components are server rendered, their shadow root contents are emitted inside a `<template shadowroot>`, also known as a [Declarative Shadow Root](https://web.dev/declarative-shadow-dom/). Declarative shadow roots automatically attach their contents to a shadow root on the template's parent element when parsed. For browsers that do not yet implement declarative shadow roots, there is a [`template-shadowroot` polyfill](https://github.com/webcomponents/template-shadowroot), whose usage is incorporated in the example below.

Put together, an HTML page that was server rendered and containing Lit components in the main document might look like this:

> ```js

Reviewer: This is server code. I'd remove this (it's int he Stackblitz demo) and focus on specific client-side considerations:

- Loading lit/experimental-hydrate-support.js (show HTML snippet)
- Loading DSD polyfill (show inlined code?, show dsd-pending pattern in isolation)
- Show an import of the app code?

Author: I did clean up the polyfill usage to not include any hydration since that seems like a valid thing to do for server-rendered things that don't require hydration, but I wasn't sure how to isolate the dsd-pending without it being too redundant. I think it's still better to read now, but we can also drop that and just point to the example with everything in it instead.

---
title: Lit SSR client API
eleventyNavigation:
  key: 🧪 Client API
  parent: Server-side rendering
  order: 3
---

<details class="pre-release">
  <summary> 🧪 Pre-release software: not for production.</summary>
  
  Lit labs packages are published to get feedback from the wider community. This code shouldn't be used in production, but we encourage you to try it out and [file issues](https://github.com/lit/lit/issues/new/choose) for any bugs you find. For general feedback, please use the GitHub [discussion](https://github.com/lit/lit/discussions).

For more information about the Lit labs process, see [Lib Labs](/docs/libraries/labs/)

</details>

Lit SSR generates static HTML for the browser to parse and paint without any JavaScript. (Browsers that do not have support for Declarative Shadow DOM will require some JavaScript polyfill for Lit components authored to utilize the Shadow DOM.) For pages with static content, this is all that's needed. However, if the page content needs to be dynamic and respond to user interactions, it will need JavaScript to re-apply that reactivity.

> "Hydration" is the process having Lit re-associate the expressions of a Lit template with the  nodes they should update in the DOM, as well as adding reactivity and life cycles to Lit components.

Author: That's a good point. Since we do have the separate sections, perhaps it's better to forego defining hydration and just speak in terms of adding back reactivity. Then talk more of what "template hydration" and "component hydration" entails in the respective sections.

```js
import {render} from 'lit';
import {hydrate} from 'lit/experimental-hydrate.js';
import {myTemplate} from './my-template.js';
// Initial hydration required before render:
// (must be same data used to render on the server)
const initialData = getInitialAppData();
hydrate(myTemplate(initialData), document.body);

// After hydration, render will efficiently update the server-rendered DOM:
const update = (data) => render(myTemplate(data), document.body);
```

## Lit Elements
When LitElements are server rendered, their shadow root contents are emitted inside a `<template shadowroot>`, also known as a [Declarative Shadow Root](https://web.dev/declarative-shadow-dom/), a new browser feature that is shipping in [Chrome](https://developer.chrome.com/blog/new-in-chrome-90/#declarative). Declarative shadow roots automatically attach their contents to a shadow root on the template's parent element when parsed. For browsers that do not yet implement declarative shadow root, there is a [`template-shadowroot` polyfill](https://github.com/webcomponents/template-shadowroot), described below.

> Because the `hydrate` function above does not descend into shadow roots, it only works on one scope of the DOM at a time. To hydrate `LitElement` shadow roots, load the `lit/experimental-hydrate-support.js` module, which installs support for `LitElement` automatically hydrating itself when it detects it was server-rendered with declarative shadow DOM. This module should be loaded before the `lit` module is loaded, to ensure hydration support is properly installed.

Author: Your reading is correct. I suppose it's unfortunate that the function for polyfilling for declarative shadow roots is named `hydrateShadowRoots`. I don't know if showing two different code snippet is advisable since the user likely should include the polyfill support for their users.

Also correct that this mistakenly does not include the `lit/experimental-hydrate-support.js`.

I do think it would be better to show the approach described here https://github.com/lit/lit/tree/main/packages/labs/eleventy-plugin-lit#example-bootup-strategy which is more recently written and efficient. Though I wonder if it's trying too much to be efficient with the preloading link tags and the dsd-pending styling is extra noise.

Put together, an HTML page that was server rendered and containing LitElements in the main document might look like this:

```js
import {render} from '@lit-labs/ssr/lib/render-with-global-dom-shim.js';
import './app-components.js';

app.use(async (ctx) => {
  const ssrResult = render(html`
    <html>
      <head>
      </head>
      <body>
        <app-shell>
          <app-page-one></app-page-one>
          <app-page-two></app-page-two>
        </app-shell>

        <script type="module">
          // Hydrate template-shadowroots eagerly after rendering (for browsers without
          // native declarative shadow roots)
          import {
            hasNativeDeclarativeShadowRoots,
            hydrateShadowRoots
          } from './node_modules/@webcomponents/template-shadowroot/template-shadowroot.js';
          if (!hasNativeDeclarativeShadowRoots) {
            hydrateShadowRoots(document.body);
          }
          // ...
          // Load and hydrate components lazily
          import('./app-components.js');
        </script>

      </body>
    </html>
  `);
  ctx.type = 'text/html';
  ctx.body = Readable.from(ssrResult);
});
```

> Note that as a simple example, the code above assumes a static top-level template that does not need to be hydrated on the client, and that top-level components individually hydrate themselves using data supplied either by attributes or via a side-channel mechanism. This is in no way fundamental; the top-level template can be used to pass data to the top-level components, and that template can be loaded and hydrated on the client to apply the same data.

Author: I took this from https://github.com/lit/lit/tree/main/packages/labs/ssr#hydrating-litelements. I believe the idea is the `<app-shell>` element could've been rendered using `lit-html`'s `render()` rather than being part of the main document. Perhaps this disclaimer is more distracting than insightful. I'll re-write the example incorporating the approach from the eleventy plugin's readme linked above to make it a bit more clear that this is meant to just be in the main document. I don't think there's a need to mention top-level template rendering.
